---
aliases:
  - "15.7"
  - optimizing multivariable functions
tags:
  - multivar
  - math
---
$f_x = f_y = 0$ critical point!
$f_x$ or $f_y$ does not exist -> critical point!

How do we find the local minima/maxima on a surface $f(x, y)$?

- Review: **properties of local maxima/minima**
	- Bigger/smaller than surrounding values
	- Note that tangent plane is 0, and it is in fact where it changes sign
		- Maxima: positive slope before, negative after
		- Minima: negative slope before, positive after
	- What about absolute maxima?
		- They must either be also local maxima, or else must be end behavior of the function.
	- Tangent plane flat, what does that mean?
		- clearly partials in $x$ and $y$ must both be zero
		- **gradient** $\nabla$ must be 0
		- $\dfrac{dy}{dx}=-\dfrac{f_x}{f_y}$
		- which is just $-\dfrac{(\nabla f)_x}{(\nabla f)_y}$ (keep in mind the subscript here is components of a vector, not partial derivatives) -> neat to keep in mind
- So, an initial naive technique for finding such local maxima/minima could be as follows:
	- Find some $x$ s.t. $f_x=0$ and $x$ is a local maxima/minima along $x$ axis; using $f_x$, find constraints on possible values of $y$
	- At an above value $y$, test to make sure it's also a maxima/minima along $y$ axis, and reconcile the constraint on $x$
	- What about a saddle point? Consider the middle of a hyperbolic paraboloid:
		- Loc. minimum along one axis, loc. max along the other!!!
		- How do we deal with this???
- Improving this:
	- Set $f_x=f_y=0$, solve for $(x, y, f)$ -> critical points
	- It turns out that concavity tests in one variable (using the second derivative, i.e. $f''(x)$) also scale to multiple variables!
		- For any given critical point $(x_c, y_c)$, $f_{xx}$ and $f_{yy}$ must be nonzero (otherwise these are inflections along $x$ or $y$ axes!) and have the same sign.
- So, for a **determinant** $D \coloneqq f_{xx}f_{yy}-f_{xy}f_{yx}$ at a given point $(x, y, f)$, we can try a **determinant test** for *well-behaving, twice-differentiable* functions:
	- But remember Clairaut's theorem for well-behaving functions: $f_{xy}=f_{yx}$!
	- Thus we have $D=f_{xx}f_{yy}-f_{xy}^2$
	- The determinant test states the following:
		- If $D > 0$:
			- $f_{xx} > 0 \implies \text{local }\textbf{minimum}$
			- $f_{xx} < 0 \implies \text{local }\textbf{maximum}$
		- If $D < 0$: we have a saddle point.
		- If $D=0$, the test is **inconclusive.**
- For absolute minima/maxima: it works the same as in 2D too!
	- Once we find critical points as above, we can survey the area immediately around the other (e.g. $y \coloneqq y_c$, $x\in \left[x-c, x+c\right]$ for some specified $c$) to check appropriate concavity

